From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bubaro. This is the daily.
[Music]
During an Oval Office meeting with
congressional Republicans a few days
ago, it didn't take President Trump long
to turn to his favorite subject, his
hatred for the chairman of the Federal
Reserve, Jay Powell. In fact, during the
meeting, Trump proudly showed off the
draft of a letter that would fire Powell
for good. It's the latest chapter in a
dysfunctional relationship that has
major implications not just for the
American economy, but for the global
economy. Today I speak with my colleague
Colby Smith about what's really at the
heart of Washington's ugliest drama.
Trump versus Powell.
It's Thursday, July 17th.
>> Colobby, nice to have you.
>> Thanks for having me. So, this is an
episode about some pretty heavy duty
topics. Monetary policy, interest rates,
tariffs, but really at its core, it's an
episode about a toxic personal
relationship between the president of
the United States and the country's most
powerful economic official. So, tell us
that story of how this relationship has
become so toxic.
>> So, it's a complicated relationship to
say the absolute least. As you
mentioned, these are two of the most
powerful policy makers in the entire
world and their decisions have massive
economic ramifications for the global
economy, the global financial system.
And at the heart of the matter, you have
President Trump who has been able to
unveil all the different aspects of his
economic agenda that he's campaigned on.
He's been successful in pushing tariffs
through. He's been successful in pushing
these tax cuts through. He's been
successful in cracking down on
immigration. That's why we say this is
Trump's economy. Absolutely. He's made
it his own.
>> He owns it through and through. And in
this one area that has massive economic,
political, and financial ramifications,
he does not have control over that. And
that is the Fed's interest rate.
He sees this as this blockade that is
making it difficult for him to achieve
what he set out to achieve on the
campaign trail. And for him, the chair
of the Federal Reserve, Jay Powell, he
is his enemy in this process.
>> Very average mentally person. He's an
average mentally person.
>> We've had non-stop name calling.
>> But we have a guy that's just a stubborn
mule.
>> He's referred to Chair Powell as a major
loser, a numb skull.
>> It doesn't help. He's like a
knucklehead.
Oh,
>> he's a knucklehead. Knucklehead.
>> Yeah, knucklehead.
>> Now we have a man that just refuses to
lower the Fed rate. just refuses to do
it. And he he's not a smart person. I
don't even think he's that political. I
think he hates me, but that's okay. You
know, he should he should I call him
every name in the book trying to get him
to do something. I've been nice to him.
>> We're not seeing President Trump talk
about the Fed as being a steward of the
economy and, you know, someone keeping
the economy on track, but rather it's an
opposition to the president.
[Music]
So, this really reached a climax on
Tuesday night. So, President Trump, he's
sitting in the Oval Office with House
Republicans. They're not meeting to talk
about Powell. And yet, you know, this is
Trump's favorite topic and and it comes
up and he starts bashing the Fed chair
and he's asking around, you know,
saying, should I fire him? Should I not?
>> He's polling these House Republicans.
Should I fire the Fed chair?
>> Right? And in all of these exchanges, he
whips out this draft letter that he has
actually firing Powell. Now, this is not
something that he has sent. He's not
even saying that he is going to send it,
but the fact of the matter is that he
clearly has it at the ready. And that's
a real escalation in his threats against
the chair. And I think just for context,
it's important to note that throughout
history, presidents have always bashed
on their Fed chairs. They're a very
useful scapegoat in that sense because
they do operate independently from the
White House. But I think the
relentlessness of his attacks has really
stood out. And we should just say the
reason why the president, why any
president wants control of the interest
rate is because the interest rate is
this accelerant or deacelerant of
economic activity. And just to be really
wonky about it, the Fed can raise
interest rates when it's worried about
inflation, higher prices, because that
will slow the economy down and help
bring prices down. or the Fed can lower
rates when it's worried about a
recession because that's a way to
stimulate economic activity. The
interest rate, in short, is this very
unique tool, weapon, whatever you want
to call it, and if you're the most
powerful person in the world, you don't
want that.
>> Exactly. The Fed pulls up on a lever or
it pulls down on that lever. And that
has a widespread impact on how people
spend throughout the economy, whether
businesses decide to invest more,
whether they decide to pull back, um
whether they hire or they fire workers.
So that's why President Trump wants it
so badly. But that's also why the Fed is
acting so cautiously here because they
know if they make the wrong move, they
could potentially be guiding the economy
in the wrong direction. So, Colobby, how
exactly did this relationship become so
testy, name call, at times ugly? And I
guess we should say one-sidedly ugly.
It's not like Chairman Powell is calling
Trump names. And I asked that question
because Trump appointed J. Powell to the
job of running the Federal Reserve. So,
at one point, he clearly liked him
enough to give him the job. So, what is
the story of how we got from there to
here? So their relationship stretches
back to November 2017. That's when Trump
nominates Powell to be the next Fed
chair. And in doing so, he broke with
tradition actually because most
presidents, they end up keeping on their
predecessors Fed chair. And that's
something he decided not to. So that was
Janet Yellen.
>> It was Janet Yellen who was appointed by
President Obama. And so she served only
one term.
>> And what exactly does Trump like about
Powell?
>> He's a Republican. He is wealthy. and he
is seen as a pragmatist and a centrist
and so he fit the bill in a lot of ways
for the president.
>> As president, there are few decisions
more important than nominating leaders
of integrity and good judgment to hold
trusted positions in
>> I always think back to the announcement
in the Rose Garden
>> and few of those trusted positions are
more important than the chairman of the
Federal Reserve. When President Trump
announces that he's picking Powell to be
his chair,
>> I am confident that Jay has the wisdom
and leadership to guide our economy
through any challenges that our great
economy may face.
>> And he has all these nice things to say
about him. He calls him smart. He says
he's committed. He says he's strong and
would be this wise steward of the Fed.
>> Thank you very much uh Mr. President for
the faith. And you know, in accepting
the nomination, Chair Powell talks about
the objectivity he's going to bring to
the role.
>> And I'm committed to making decisions
with objectivity based on the best
available evidence in the long-standing
tradition of monetary policy
independence.
Mr. President, thank you again for this
extraordinary opportunity to serve the
American people. Thank you.
>> And you really get a sense that he
understands the position that he's about
to step into here. And we as omnicient
storytellers can tell that the seeds of
a future conflict have been laid.
Independence on the one hand and strong
person that I want in the job for me on
the other.
>> Exactly. We have our main characters.
[Music]
And I think the timing of this is really
important because Powell takes over in
February 2018. This is right around the
time that Trump embarks on his first
trade war where he's putting tariffs on
Chinese imports
>> and the Fed is raising interest rates,
but tensions don't really start boiling
over until July when President Trump
starts to be more vocal about his
misgivings about what the Fed is doing.
>> What is he saying?
>> I put a very good man in the Fed. I
don't necessarily agree with it because
he's raising interest rates. I'm not
saying that I agree with it. So, he's
starting out relatively benign.
>> I'm not thrilled uh because, you know,
we go up and every time you go up, they
want to raise rates again. And I don't
really uh I am not happy about it. Uh
but at the same time, I'm letting them
do what they feel is best.
>> He's saying, you know, I'm not really
thrilled with what they're doing here. I
don't really think they should be
raising interest rates. But he doesn't
do anything or say anything that seems
like he's like coming after their
independence in any way, shape, or form.
You know, the attacks really start to
escalate as we get into the fall. I
think the Fed is out of control. I think
what they're doing is wrong.
>> He says the Fed has gone crazy. They're
out of control with these interest rate
increases.
>> No, no. My biggest threat is the Fed
because the Fed is raising rates too
fast.
>> And things start to really take a turn
in December when he was asking around
whether he has the legal authority to
fire the chair. And these conversations
end up becoming public. And it leads
Steven Minutuchin, the Treasury
Secretary at the time, to have to go out
there and assure financial markets in
the world that the president isn't about
to get rid of his Fed chair. You know,
he says something along the lines of the
president isn't happy with what Powell
is doing here, but he kind of
understands that he's sticking around.
I mean, just to step back and try to
understand what's really happening here
between Trump and Powell. Clearly,
there's not just a divergence about
whether the interest rate should be
raised or cut in this moment. That's
clear enough. There seems to be a
divergence over the role of the Fed and
who should control it.
>> Right. Absolutely. I think Trump sees
the Fed as an institution that can act
at his behest, that can help him fulfill
his economic and political ambitions.
For the Fed, what they're trying to do
is steer the economy in the right
direction, and they're doing so without
the influence of the White House.
>> Right? There is this inherent tension.
The Fed is trying to manage the
long-term health of the economy. The
president, for obvious reasons, wants a
strong economy during his or her tenure.
And what's good politically for the
president in the short term, in many
cases, low interest rates, isn't
necessarily good for the economy in the
long term if you are the Fed.
>> That's right. And I think it's important
here to unpack how the Fed goes about
making its decisions because it's not up
to one person. It's a consensus driven
organization. So there is a committee of
12 officials. They vote on policy at any
given moment. So they need to be certain
that this is the right thing for the
economy in order to get there. And this
isn't something that is just like
flicking a switch like President Trump
has kind of talked about.
>> Right. It's a carefully and slowly
considered process that it sounds like
everyone at the Fed sees as deeply
independent of politics.
>> Exactly. It's very deliberate. And the
idea here is that a central bank that's
independent is going to put the economy
on the best footing possible because
they're not worried about the whims of a
political party. They're not worried
about an election cycle. They are
chiefly focused on making sure they're
prioritizing that inflation is staying
slow and stable and the labor market is
healthy. And those two goals are what
gives people confidence that the economy
is in good hands. So, how does that
tension continue to play out in Trump's
first term?
>> So, I think everything gets overshadowed
at some point by the pandemic.
Basically, the entire world shuts down.
The economy is in freef fall. Financial
markets are seizing up. At that point,
tension between these two individuals
somewhat evaporates because we're in a
crisis fighting mode. So, the Fed knows
exactly what to do in a crisis situation
like this. They cut interest rates to
zero. They're waiting into financial
markets. They're buying unlimited
government bonds. They're doing
everything in their power in order to
stabilize the situation. And the Trump
administration pushed through two big
stimulus packages to prop up the
economy. And then Biden came into the
office and did another big package as
well to shore up growth. And this is
when Powell makes this big
miscalculation that he even conceds is
an error on his end. It happens in 2021
when Biden is in office. And this
mistake ends up haunting the Fed and
eventually influencing his relationship
with Trump. Now,
>> well, just explain that.
>> You know, supply chains are all gummed
up. There's shortages in goods
everywhere at exactly the moment that
all this money is coming into the system
and that has helped to bid up prices
over time.
>> So, as this situation starts unfolding,
Powell is faced with this big question.
Is the inflation that started to show
through, is that temporary or is that
persistent?
>> Inflation at these levels is of course a
cause for concern. Pal ends up putting
his stake in the ground on inflation in
August of 2021.
>> But that concern is tempered by a number
of factors that that suggest that these
elevated readings are likely to prove
temporary.
>> He makes this big speech in front of
global policy makers and the world
frankly where he says this inflation is
temporary. We're going to keep interest
rates low in this environment. And that
ends up being the wrong call because
what ends up happening is that inflation
really starts to reacelerate from that
point on. And the Fed because it's slow
to kind of catch on to the extent of the
problem, inflation ends up spiraling as
high as 9% in the summer of 2022. So
eventually, you know, after a series of
historic interest rate increases, the
Fed does get a handle on inflation.
But I think the long-term lesson here
for the Fed and for Chair Powell in
particular is not to be complacent about
it
because if they misread the inflation
situation, they let things get out of
hand, then they're going to be
potentially facing down a much worse
problem later down the line.
>> And just to be very clear for Powell,
the lesson is do not for a second take
your eye off inflation and the minute
you see inflation, slay the inflation
dragon.
>> That's the lesson from this whole
period. And it's something that we see
the Fed and Chair Powell bring up time
and again in Trump's second term in the
White House. And that lesson makes an
already bad relationship even worse.
We'll be right back.
So Colby, talk about how this already
not good relationship in term one
further devolves in term two and how
this lesson that J. Pal has observed
somehow fits into it.
>> So it starts to devolve even before
President Trump is back in the White
House. So on the campaign trail, he is
attacking the chair for lowering
interest rates, which they started to do
in September, just a couple months
before the election. And
>> and why are they lowering interest
rates? So they're doing this because
they wanted to support the economy. At
this time, inflation had receded from
some of those like post-pandemic peak
and the labor market was starting to
cool off. And this was the big first
rate reduction that we had seen in the
kind of post-pandemic period. Okay? And
in Trump's eyes, this was entirely
political. They were doing this to kind
of tip the scales towards Kla Harris's
campaign to juice the economy basically
before all the voters descended to the
voting booth. Scott, so in Trump's mind,
if the interest rate is being cut when
he is a candidate for president and
Biden is the incumbent and Harris is
running, then it's being done in some
ways to screw with him.
>> And also, it was like the magnitude that
I think pissed him off even more.
Typically, the Fed moves in these like
quarter point increments and they ended
up moving much faster than that for the
first cut and then the Fed ended up
cutting interest rates again in
November. They cut interest rates in
December and then Trump comes back to
the White House and then the Fed presses
pause on all of it. They say, "We're
going to wait and see and we need to
take stock of what President Trump has
planned for this economy."
>> Right? Because Trump has a lot planned
for the economy in the second term. Once
he gets in, he is issuing executive
orders on immigration. He is levying
tariffs on countries across the world.
Doge is cutting tens of thousands of
federal jobs. the things Trump
campaigned on, he's now doing. I'm
hearing you say that the Fed looking at
all of this is saying that's a lot. We
need to see how it filters through the
economy before we can make any educated
decision about the interest rate,
>> right? Tariffs, for instance, the
thinking there is that it's going to
raise inflation at the same time that it
slows down growth.
>> The immigration crackdown, that's going
to shrink the labor force and it also
could mean higher inflation as well. You
also have tax cuts layered on top of
that and deregulation. So there's a lot
of moving parts and the Fed, they move
slowly. It takes a lot of time to like
gain consensus amongst all the various
officials to get to the right point and
know which direction to go in terms of
interest rates and they don't want to
rush. And their argument here is that
the economy is on solid enough footing
that there's no urgency here.
>> Meanwhile, Trump is like, we got to cut
interest rates now. I want lower
borrowing costs. It's going to be better
for my economic agenda.
>> Deja vu. Exactly. Dja vu.
>> And what's still very much at the heart
of this perhaps irretrievably
dysfunctional relationship is Trump
wants Jay Powell to lower interest
rates. Powell isn't giving into Trump's
demands. He's keeping them exactly where
they are. But I wonder just based purely
on the economic situation we're in now
whether Trump has any point here that
may make him right. even if it might
seem to Powell like his motivations are
wrong.
>> So I mean he's right in the sense that
inflation has come down over time that
we are in a situation in which compared
to where we were a couple years ago
price pressures are a lot more muted and
the economy is looking okay. And in an
environment like that it it makes total
sense that the Fed would be cutting
interest rates from these relatively
elevated levels and providing some
support. But the problem is is that the
policies that he has laid out are
inflationary. That's at least what
economists and policy makers think is
the case. And when you have a situation
where you think inflation is coming down
the pipe, you're not going to lower
interest rates now if you eventually
have to reverse course later because
consumer prices start rising again in a
significant way.
>> And specifically, when we say that
Trump's policies are inflationary, I'm
assuming we mean his tariffs in
particular. It's tariffs in particular,
but I also think it's immigration
restrictions. When you, you know, cut
back the supply of labor in the economy,
that means fewer workers. That could
potentially mean, you know, companies
have to provide higher wages to get
people in the door again. So, there are
reasons to think that inflation has not
been vanquished entirely here,
>> right? And as we know, that is the very
thing Jay Powell is most anxious about,
not having done, vanquishing inflation.
That's the lesson that is being
internalized here at the Fed and it's
what's fueling this debate that's
ongoing amongst officials at the current
moment. So JPAL isn't alone in wanting
to be patient in terms of cutting
interest rates. There's a large group of
policy makers that are also kind of in
his corner, but other officials have
taken a different view that are slightly
more aligned with where the Trump
administration is at here. So what the
heart of the debate comes down to is how
to view inflation caused by tariffs. we
go back to the same kind of question
that we grappled with after the
pandemic. Is this inflation temporary or
is it persistent? Now the thinking here
amongst this cohort of officials is that
tariffs are actually going to lead to
only a temporary burst in inflation. So
the case that this is temporary rests on
this assumption that these price
pressures are going to come through, but
they're not going to feed on themselves.
So back during the post-pandemic period,
what we ended up seeing was that these
price pressures broadened out. So it
wasn't just in the supply chain
disrupted sectors, it spread well beyond
that into services into to areas that
were not directly impacted by the
pandemic. And the thinking of this group
of officials is that it's going to stay
pretty contained and that means that
over time it's not going to lead to
inflation, you know, getting out of
control again. Now, that's really, I
think, where the Trump administration is
at in terms of what is going to happen
to inflation over time. But what is
preventing the bulk of the Fed from
moving in that same direction is the
fact that they don't want to make the
same mistake again twice. They want more
data. They want to take a little bit
more time. They want to have more
certainty than otherwise would be the
case had they not just made this error a
couple of years ago.
>> Right. And we should say, you and I are
talking after the government just
released data, monthly inflation data
that showed that prices rose 2.7%
in May compared with the May a year ago.
Which is to say that if you're at the
Fed and you're in the Jay Powell camp of
wait and see, you've just seen data that
suggests that prices are continuing to
rise and your instinct is probably not
to defer to the Trump camp that says cut
interest rates, roll the dice, hope it's
temporary. Your fear is that it's not
temporary and your evidence in part is
this new data,
>> right? And the data showed clear
evidence that tariffs are starting to
impact consumer prices. And I think
what's worrisome about this is that this
is like the early stages of this. So the
expectation for economists and policy
makers is that as the summer kind of
continues, this is just only going to
kind of intensify as we get new data.
And so that puts the Fed in a really
uncomfortable position. How is it going
to justify cutting interest rates when
price pressures are moving away from
their stated goal and the economy is
still kind of doing okay? It doesn't
seem like the rationale is really there
just yet. And so I think that's why we
can broadly expect them to see them
extend this whole wait and see approach
at least for the next couple of months.
>> Which of course explains why the
president is now so evidently
furious at Powell. So much so that he
waves that draft letter saying you're
fired in the Oval Office. We should be
careful and say he hasn't sent that
letter. It's therefore not official. But
that raises the question, can Trump fire
Jay Powell?
>> So the president can't outright fire a
Fed chair. The rules stipulate that like
once they're in that position and
confirmed by the Senate, they're
relatively protected here. And the only
mechanism that the president has, which
was just recently reestablished by the
Supreme Court earlier this year, is that
the president has to find cause in order
to get rid of a fed official.
>> Right? You can't just fire him because
you disagree with him. You have to fire
him because he took a bribe.
>> Right? It can't be about a rate
decision. It has to be like severe
misconduct or, you know, some kind of
dereliction of duty. And that really
raises the bar for Trump to find
something in order to get Powell
removed. One of the avenues that we have
seen most recently is Republicans going
after the Fed chair from renovations
taking place at the central bank's
headquarters down in DC.
>> These are very costly. They've attracted
a lot of attention at a time when there
are cuts across the government. And
recently there was an allegation that
Chair Powell had lied to Congress about
the extent of the plans. And when legal
experts kind of have pieced through
these accusations, they have been
concerned that this is one of the ways
in which the Trump administration is
trying to build the case for cause.
>> Now, that's a really hard argument to
build and I don't think a lot of people
think it's going to be successful. So
what are the other options from this?
>> So the other options that the president
has toyed with is naming Powell's
successor early. So Powell's term ends
in May of 2026. And so the idea here is
that by naming someone early and having
them come out and talk about a very
divergent, you know, path for interest
rates or to put forward a very different
view on the economy that more aligns
with President Trump's that that's a way
for them to discredit Powell and put
more attention on whoever is going to be
taking the reigns in a couple,
>> right? It would kind of like it would
kind of be like having two popes. You'd
almost have in theory two Fed chairs,
one official, one kind of shadow. And
that is a recipe for disaster in terms
of communication for the Fed because
what they rely on is that financial
markets have an understanding of where
they're going with interest rates and
policy and that is what makes their
policy setting effective. So if you have
the same institution essentially
speaking in completely divergent ways
that could lead to a really bad outcome
where people don't know who to listen
to. And so in a world where Trump does
not get what he wants for the next many
months, let's even for the sake of
argument say he may not get a rate cut
before J. Powell's term is up next May.
Suddenly the president has the
opportunity to put in place a
replacement for Jay Powell. And I think
we can presume it's going to be someone
who agrees with the president that
generally speaking interest rates should
be cut. What is it going to look like
for us to have a Fed chairperson who may
be in the mold of the rest of Trump's
appointees to various government
agencies who see their role as
fulfilling his vision? That's not what
JPAL thought. If we suddenly have a Fed
chair who says, "I wake up in the
morning and my job is to see the economy
as Trump sees it." What does that mean
for us all? What does that mean for the
US economy and maybe even the global
economy? It's a big change. I mean, I
think it's a really worrying development
and it's something that people are
already grappling with today. This idea
that this institution might not be this
like beacon of credibility that it has
always been. If you have someone leading
the Fed who is being influenced by the
White House, that really changes your
perception about the decisions that that
person is trying to usher through. And
one investor I spoke to was like, I
don't even know who the next Fed chair
is, and I already don't trust him. And
and that's such a huge issue for whoever
is in the role because the role is based
upon having the support of financial
markets and being seen as a credible
individual guiding the economy in the
right direction.
>> What that investor was basically telling
you is that what Trump has done in
bludgeoning J. Powell the way he has
over these now many years is made it
impossible for people to see his next
choice as someone who can operate
independently
>> and the stakes could not be higher.
You could easily see a situation where
we have higher inflation, a worse
economic backdrop
and a person in the role who is not kind
of willing to make the tough choices
that would potentially go against the
president that would benefit the
long-term health of the economy over
these short-term gains that President
Trump is focused on.
Well,
>> Kobe,
thank you very much. Appreciate it.
>> Thank you.
[Music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today. On
Wednesday, President Trump issued a
blistering rebuke of those on the right
who are upset with him over how he's
handled files related to Jeffrey
Epstein, the convicted sex offender
whose connections to the rich and
powerful have spurred conspiracy
theories about his suicide. In a social
media post, Trump mocked those who are
criticizing him as past supporters who
have quote bought into this
hook, line, and sinker. But the reality
is that current supporters are among his
critics, including Republican House
Speaker Mike Johnson and the
conservative activist Laura Loomer.
And
During an audacious attack in broad
daylight, Israel launched deadly air
strikes on the capital of Syria,
damaging its defense ministry and nearly
hitting its presidential palace.
Israel said that the strikes are an
attempt to stop Syria's new government
from attacking a minority group in the
country's southern region, which borders
Israel. Israel said that it would keep
striking Syria's government until Syrian
troops withdraw from the region.
Today's episode was produced by Ricky
Netski and Olivia Nap with help from
Michelle Bonja. It was edited by Mark
George and Lisa Chow. Contains original
music by Diane Wong, Dan Powell, Pat
McCusker, and Rowan Deisto. And was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our theme
music is by Jim Runberg and Ben Lansberg
of Wonderland.
That's it, the daily. I'm Michael
Bavaro. See you tomorrow.
[Music]